Meditation Skill 10
Cultivation: JOYFULNESS & UNIFICATION
Name: Whole-Body Breathing
Subtitle: How to transform sensory stimulation into intimate body breathing.

Quote: "They train themselves: 'I will breathe in sensitive to the entire body.' They train themselves: 'I will breathe out sensitive to the entire body'." The Buddha, MN119.

Overview:
As you become skilled in developing tranquillity, you no longer need to practice Skills 07-09. From Skill 06: Whole of Each Breath, you will now gradually become more aware of the pleasurable experience of your whole body as it breathes in Skill 10, to withdraw awareness from the six sense fields.

Duration:
Meditation Length: 60 minutes.

Benefits:
This Skill will teach you to develop calmness and non-reactivity to sensory experiences so that your mind is less disturbed by stimulation throughout the day.

Purpose:
Withdraw peripheral awareness from your six sense fields to increase mental seclusion in preparation for access concentration and jhana (wholesome absorption).

Resources:
YouTube: Video Instructions - https://youtu.be/_1T1vkfTwJM
SoundCloud: Guided Meditation - https://soundcloud.com/user-677685629/midl-insight-meditation-4?si=8d8644e668d14ff5bb0a190be6066919&utm_source=clipboard&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=social_sharing

Step-by-Step Instructions:

Step 1: Meditation Skills 01-06.
Your meditation remains the same as in Meditation Skills 01-06, except you now move directly to Skill 10 once tranquillity is developed and add Steps 2-3 as new additions to your meditation. You will know when enough tranquillity has developed because your mind will become tranquil as mind wandering calms, and awareness will become clear as dullness is removed from your mind.

Your Meditation So Far:
- Sit in meditation.
- Reflect gratefully.
- Enjoy relaxing your body and mind.
- Enjoy being content & present in your body.
- Enjoy the whole of each breath as your body breathes.
- Add: Enjoy the pleasure of your whole body as it breathes.

Additions for developing mindfulness of Whole-Body Breathing in Skill 10:

Step 2: Breathing throughout Your Body.
From being aware of the whole length of each breath in Skill 06, begin to open your awareness to the experience of breathing throughout your body. As your awareness of the entire breath increases, begin to calm your body, breathing, and mind until the felt sense of calm deepens. As you stay with the whole length of the breath, enjoying it and becoming intimate with it, the calm will develop into tranquillity. This will be correlated with a decrease in mind wandering and an absence of the hindrance of forgetting.

Step 3: Whole Body Breathing.
Gradually increase your awareness of your entire body as it breathes until you experience breathing throughout your whole body, simply inclining towards whole-body awareness, where the breath and the body are intimately sensed together.

Tip: Increased intimacy with the subtle pleasure of your whole-body breathing will withdraw your awareness from the stimulation of your six senses. As sensitivity to your senses fades, body-breathing will transition from a physical meditation object in Skill 10 to a mind-created one in Skill 11, taking the experience of piti-sukha as an object.

Insight Section:

Progression in mindfulness of breathing can be accurately tracked by observing your ability to access the Meditation Markers. This can be done by developing insight into their associated Meditative Hindrances and changing the conditions that support them.

Insight: Insight is developed at this stage of mindfulness of breathing by cultivating intimacy with breathing throughout your body, creating the conditions for Marker 10: Whole-Body Breathing, and weakening the conditions that support Hindrance 10: Sensory Stimulation.

Progression Map Adjustment:

After developing intimacy with Marker 06: Whole of Each Breath, your meditation will naturally transition to the experience of Marker 10: Whole-Body Breathing. This transition occurs because your skill in calming the conditions that support Hindrances 00-09 improves when you sustain attention in Meditation Skill 09. As intimacy with whole-body breathing increases, awareness of your five senses will begin to fade, and the pleasantness of your whole-body breathing will fill your awareness.

NEW Progression Map for Mindfulness of Breathing:

Meditative Hindrances                          Meditation Markers
(Hindrances to calm)                           (Signs of deepening calm)

                                               01: Body Relaxation.
                                               02: Mind Relaxation.
                                               03: Mindful Presence.
                                               04: Content Presence.
                                               05: Natural Breathing.
                                               06: Whole of Each Breath.

10: Sensory Stimulation.         →             10: Whole-Body Breathing.
11: Anticipation of Pleasure.                  11: Sustained Awareness.
12: Fear of Letting Go.                        12: Access Concentration.
13: Unstable Unification.                      13: First Pleasure Jhana.
14: Enchantment with Piti.                     14: Second Pleasure Jhana.
15: Enchantment with Sukha.                    15: Third Pleasure Jhana.
16: Enchantment with Happiness.                16: Fourth Pleasure Jhana.

Note: Markers 00 is no longer needed. Markers 07-09 are no longer needed.

Meditative Hindrance: Sensory Stimulation (10).
Background sensory stimulation within peripheral awareness.

Sensory Stimulation refers to the subtle, habitual grasping of the mind onto sensory experiences within the peripheral awareness during meditation. This subtle habitual sensory grasping disturbs the unification of the mind because of the dispersal of mind energy and, therefore, hinders the development of upacara samadhi (access concentration).

Antidote:
Developing your skill in cultivating intimacy with your whole body as it breathes in Marker 10, is the antidote for the Hindrance of Sensory Stimulation. The antidote to sensory stimulation is to become aware of breathing within your body part by part, as described in the above meditation instructions. Once you are aware of breathing throughout your body, you create a strong intention to be fully present in this experience. With this intimacy, you will begin to experience a fading of your sensory fields, including the body sense, with bodily pleasantness replacing sensations within your body. When your mind develops intimacy with this bodily pleasantness, this instability will come to an end.

Tip: You may experience shaking in your attention as you transition from sustained attention to peripheral awareness of your whole body as it breathes. This may occur due to a weakness in your ability to open your awareness, allowing you to take in many experiences as one within a single field of that awareness. This is like looking over a valley and taking in the whole view rather than focusing on one thing within that view.

Progression Criteria:

You are ready to progress to Meditation Skill 11: Sustained Awareness when:
- You become intimately aware of the experience of your whole-body breathing as a pleasurable breath experience, and your awareness of your five physical senses begins to fade (viraga).
