Meditation Skill 13
Cultivation: PLEASURE JHANA & EQUANIMITY
Name: First Pleasure Jhana
Subtitle: How to enter the first pleasure jhana through intimacy with piti (blissful pleasure)

Quote: "Secluded from the desire for sensory experience, secluded from unwholesome qualities, a meditator enters and dwells within the first jhana, with applied and sustained attention, blissful feelings in body & mind, and joyful happiness born of seclusion." The Buddha, MN119.

Overview:
As your samadhi reaches access concentration in Skill 12, you continue to develop intimacy with the pleasantness of the experience of piti within your body and mind, until your mind takes it as an object within your samadhi and flows with and absorbs into it to enter the first pleasure jhana.

Duration:
Meditation Length: 60 minutes, 2-3 times daily, to give your mind time to absorb into piti and abide in the first pleasure jhana. This stage requires a simplification of your life, adherence to sila (morality) and inclining your mind toward that which is kusala (wholesome/skilful).

Benefits:
Regularly entering and experiencing the first pleasure jhana will weaken your mind's attraction to extracting pleasure from worldly experiences (including thinking) and develop an inclination of your mind toward the spiritual pleasure that is only available through letting go of desire for worldly sensory pleasure.

Summary:
Unify in access concentration on the blissful, pleasant feeling of piti of your whole-body breathing, and allow the feeling of joy and happiness of sukha to rest in peripheral awareness.

Step-by-Step Instructions:

Step 1: Develop access concentration as in Meditation Skill 12.
"Secluded from the desire for sensory experience, secluded from unwholesome qualities."
As in Meditation Skill 12, continue to increase your mind's intimacy with the pleasantness of the piti experience throughout your whole body as it breathes until you develop initial access concentration.

Step 2: Allow the pleasant feeling of piti throughout your body to grow.
It is important to allow any feeling of piti to grow naturally through letting go and not to be tempted to do anything to try to increase it at this early stage. Once you can rest in access concentration for at least 15 minutes and a clear experience of pleasant piti feeling is present in your body, you can begin to develop the conditions for the first pleasure jhana.

Step 3: Rest awareness on the clearest pleasant feeling of piti in your body.
When the pleasant feeling of piti is clear and continuous in your body, rest your attention on the place in your body where the pleasant feeling is most clear to you. Focus your attention on the clearest pleasant feeling in your body and allow your mind to absorb the pleasantness of the pleasant feeling.

Tip: Play around with where you experience the pleasant piti feeling most clearly. Using the MIDL technique, maintain a continuous, heartfelt smile through your eyes. This brings up a clear, pleasant sensation around your eyes and forehead. Some meditators experience clear pleasant feeling in their chest, heart centre, or in their hands. Some report experiencing it in their legs or spine as an upward-moving, pleasurable energy. Wherever you experience the pleasantness of piti is ok; the important part is to let it be and enjoy its presence.

Step 4: Be aware of the pleasant feeling of the piti and let it be.
At first, nothing may happen. The pleasant feeling may intensify suddenly then weaken again. Simply be aware of it and let it be. Any attempt to do anything will cause the piti to fade. Your only task is to develop stable attention on the pleasant piti feeling.

Tip: This is the important part - not doing anything. When you first bring your awareness to the pleasant piti feeling, nothing may happen. The thought that nothing will happen may come up and stop anything from happening. Any anticipation of jhana at this stage will cause the whole thing to collapse. Remember, anticipation is one of the hindrances to access concentration and jhana. It is a matter of learning how to maintain access concentration sustained enough to suppress hindrances and how to calm your mind so that it can be with the pleasant piti feeling without needing to do anything with it.

Step 5: Allow your mind to absorb into the pleasantness.
At some point, the feeling of pleasantness will gradually increase in strength and clarity. Allow your mind to experience and enjoy the pleasantness of the piti until your mind enters an autonomous flow with the pleasantness of the experience.
When the conditions are right, the pleasantness will start to enter your mind. Take in the experience like you would take in a beautiful view. Let the pleasant feeling fill your mind. Since your mind creates pleasant feelings when it is happy, it will start to produce more pleasant feelings. This creates a feedback loop of pleasant feelings between your body and mind.

Tip: Any attempt to help the piti grow will reengage your intellectual mind and collapse the pleasant-feeling feedback loop. It is the pleasantness of the piti that the mind flows with and absorbs into. Allow your mind to rest in and absorb the pleasantness of the feeling, enjoying it.

Step 6: Allow your mind to enter the First Pleasure Jhana.
The pleasant piti feeling will gradually grow and flow through your mind and body, filling your awareness. When mature, your awareness will autonomously absorb into and flow with this experience. You may experience a shift as your awareness 'sinks into' the flow of blissful pleasantness or as the flow expands and surrounds your awareness. Regardless of how you experience it, it will be clear that an autonomous experience has occurred and a definite shift in consciousness has taken place. When this happens, your mind has entered the first pleasure jhana.

Once absorbed, you will have a blissful, pleasant sensation flowing through your body and mind. This may be a flow that fills all parts or a flow shooting up your spine. The blissful pleasant feeling brings a smile that doesn't want to go away, and an uplifting feeling of joy in your mind and open happiness in your heart (sukha).

Step 7: Pervade your body and mind with the experience of piti and sukha.
"A meditator permeates and pervades, saturates and fills their body with blissful feelings and joyful happiness born of seclusion, so that there is no part of their entire body that is unpervaded by blissful feeling & joyful happiness."

As the blissful energy of the first pleasure jhana settles down, expand your awareness outward until no part of your body and mind remains untouched by the pleasant piti feeling. Keep practicing accessing the first pleasure jhana. Gradually your mind will become desensitized to the piti feeling and begin to incline toward the more subtle experience of sukha. When sukha comes to the foreground of awareness and piti fades into the background, your mind is inclining toward the second pleasure jhana.

Additional Guidance:

Watch out for anticipation & fear - At this stage, be careful of the last two meditative hindrances: The anticipation of experiencing pleasure (H11) and The fear of letting go of control (H12). These will cause your attention to bounce out of access concentration. Remember it is okay; it is part of the learning process.

When piti is too strong - For some meditators, piti may become very intense, making mind and body shake. If your mind keeps bouncing in and out of the first pleasure jhana because piti is too strong, there are a couple of techniques: (1) Learn to develop access concentration by letting go of control of your attention and experiencing meditation through your body; (2) At access concentration, incline your mind toward the joy and happiness of sukha rather than the pleasantness of piti to calm your mind's grasping onto pleasure.

Progression Criteria:

You are ready to progress to Meditation Skill 14: Second Pleasure Jhana when:
- You are comfortable developing and abiding in the first pleasure jhana for longer periods, and your mind is inclining away from the stimulation of piti toward the subtler happiness of sukha.

Tip: Once in access concentration, learn to bring the joyful happiness of sukha to the foreground of your awareness and relax your interest in the pleasant feeling of piti, so that it rests in peripheral awareness. This is done by allowing loud music at a party to fade into the background so it doesn't disturb your conversation. This shifting withdraws some of the energetic quality from the piti, allowing the focus to shift to subtler experiences of tranquillity and sukha.
